====================
Internationalization
====================

Kajiki provides supporting infrastructure for internationalizing and localizing
templates.  This includes functionality for extracing localizable strings from
templates, as well as translation of localizable strings.

Basics
=======

The simplest way to internationalize and translate templates would be to wrap all
localizable strings in a `gettext()` function call (usually aliased to `_()` for
brevity.  In this case, you would write you templates similar to the following:

.. code-block:: xml

    <p>${_('Hello, world!')}</p>

This approach, however, adds lots of noise to your templates.  Kajiki essentially
does this automatically to all "translatable text" in XML templates (any text
outside of an XML tag). 

In order to actually use translation, you must replace the placeholder function
in `kajiki.i18n.gettext` with the actual gettext function.  For instance, you
might place the following in your top-level script to enable the Python gettext
module::

    from gettext import gettext
    from kajiki import i18n
    i18n.gettext = gettext

Extraction
=====================

Kajiki also provides support for extracing all localizable strings found in a
template.  This functionality is integrated with teh excellent message extraction
framework provided by the Babel_ project.  Typically, you would notify Babel of
the location of your templates before running the extraction routine:

..  code-block:: none

    # Python source
    [python:**.py]
    # Kajiki Templates
    [kajiki:**/templates/**.html]

Please consult the Babel documentation for further details.  If all goes well,
the extraction process should create a POT file containing the strings from your
Kajiki templates and your Python source files.

.. _Babel: http://babel.edgewall.org/
